 Cornell University Library We gratefully acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation and member institutions arXiv.org > cs > arXiv:1610.07629 All papers Titles Authors Abstracts Full text Help pages (Help | Advanced search) Full-text links: Download: PDF Other formats (license) Current browse context: cs.CV < prev | next > new | recent | 1610 Change to browse by: cs cs.LG References & Citations NASA ADS DBLP - CS Bibliography listing | bibtex Vincent Dumoulin Jonathon Shlens Manjunath Kudlur Bookmark (what is this?) Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Title: A Learned Representation For Artistic Style Authors: Vincent Dumoulin, Jonathon Shlens, Manjunath Kudlur (Submitted on 24 Oct 2016) Abstract: The diversity of painting styles represents a rich visual vocabulary for the construction of an image. The degree to which one may learn and parsimoniously capture this visual vocabulary measures our understanding of the higher level features of paintings, if not images in general. In this work we investigate the construction of a single, scalable deep network that can parsimoniously capture the artistic style of a diversity of paintings. We demonstrate that such a network generalizes across a diversity of artistic styles by reducing a painting to a point in an embedding space. Importantly, this model permits a user to explore new painting styles by arbitrarily combining the styles learned from individual paintings. We hope that this work provides a useful step towards building rich models of paintings and offers a window on to the structure of the learned representation of artistic style. Comments: 9 pages. 15 pages of Appendix Subjects: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (cs.CV); Learning (cs.LG) Cite as: arXiv:1610.07629 [cs.CV]   (or arXiv:1610.07629v1 [cs.CV] for this version) Submission history From: Jonathon Shlens [view email] [v1] Mon, 24 Oct 2016 20:06:54 GMT (47073kb,D) Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact. 