 Cornell University Library We gratefully acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation and member institutions arXiv.org > cs > arXiv:1610.06940 All papers Titles Authors Abstracts Full text Help pages (Help | Advanced search) Full-text links: Download: PDF Other formats (license) Current browse context: cs.AI < prev | next > new | recent | 1610 Change to browse by: cs cs.LG stat stat.ML References & Citations NASA ADS DBLP - CS Bibliography listing | bibtex Xiaowei Huang Marta Kwiatkowska Sen Wang Min Wu Bookmark (what is this?) Computer Science > Artificial Intelligence Title: Safety Verification of Deep Neural Networks Authors: Xiaowei Huang, Marta Kwiatkowska, Sen Wang, Min Wu (Submitted on 21 Oct 2016 (v1), last revised 5 Nov 2016 (this version, v2)) Abstract: Deep neural networks have achieved impressive experimental results in image classification, but can surprisingly be unstable with respect to adversarial perturbations, that is, minimal changes to the input image that cause the network to misclassify it. With potential applications including perception modules and end-to-end controllers for self-driving cars, this raises concerns about their safety. We develop the first SMT-based automated verification framework for feed-forward multi-layer neural networks that works directly with the code of the network, exploring it layer by layer. We define safety for a region around a data point in a given layer by requiring that all points in the region are assigned the same class label. Working with a notion of a manipulation, a mapping between points that intuitively corresponds to a modification of an image, we employ discretisation to enable exhaustive search of the region. Our method can guarantee that adversarial examples are found for the given region and set of manipulations. If found, adversarial examples can be shown to human testers and/or used to fine-tune the network, and otherwise the network is declared safe for the given parameters. We implement the techniques using Z3 and evaluate them on state-of-the-art networks, including regularised and deep learning networks. Subjects: Artificial Intelligence (cs.AI); Learning (cs.LG); Machine Learning (stat.ML) Cite as: arXiv:1610.06940 [cs.AI]   (or arXiv:1610.06940v2 [cs.AI] for this version) Submission history From: Xiaowei Huang [view email] [v1] Fri, 21 Oct 2016 20:16:16 GMT (2541kb,D) [v2] Sat, 5 Nov 2016 16:05:08 GMT (2448kb,D) Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact. 