 Cornell University Library We gratefully acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation and member institutions arXiv.org > cs > arXiv:1610.04490 All papers Titles Authors Abstracts Full text Help pages (Help | Advanced search) Full-text links: Download: PDF Other formats (license) Current browse context: cs.CV < prev | next > new | recent | 1610 Change to browse by: cs cs.LG stat stat.ML References & Citations NASA ADS DBLP - CS Bibliography listing | bibtex Casper Kaae Sønderby Jose Caballero Lucas Theis Wenzhe Shi Ferenc Huszár Bookmark (what is this?) Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Title: Amortised MAP Inference for Image Super-resolution Authors: Casper Kaae Sønderby, Jose Caballero, Lucas Theis, Wenzhe Shi, Ferenc Huszár (Submitted on 14 Oct 2016) Abstract: Image Super-resolution (SR) is an underdetermined inverse problem, where a large number of plausible high-resolution images can explain the same downsampled image. Most current single image SR methods use empirical risk minimisation, often with a pixel-wise mean squared error (MSE) loss. However, the outputs from such methods tend to be blurry, over-smoothed and generally appear implausible. A more desirable approach would employ Maximum a Posteriori (MAP) inference, preferring solutions that always have a high probability under the image prior, and thus appear more plausible. Direct MAP estimation for SR is non-trivial, as it requires us to build a model for the image prior from samples. Furthermore, MAP inference is often performed via optimisation-based iterative algorithms which don't compare well with the efficiency of neural-network-based alternatives. Here we introduce new methods for amortised MAP inference whereby we calculate the MAP estimate directly using a convolutional neural network. We first introduce a novel neural network architecture that performs a projection to the affine subspace of valid SR solutions ensuring that the high resolution output of the network is always consistent with the low resolution input. We show that, using this architecture, the amortised MAP inference problem reduces to minimising the cross-entropy between two distributions, similar to training generative models. We propose three methods to solve this optimisation problem: (1) Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (2) denoiser-guided SR which backpropagates gradient-estimates from denoising to train the network, and (3) a baseline method using a maximum-likelihood-trained image prior. Our experiments show that the GAN based approach performs best on real image data, achieving particularly good results in photo-realistic texture SR. Subjects: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (cs.CV); Learning (cs.LG); Machine Learning (stat.ML) Cite as: arXiv:1610.04490 [cs.CV]   (or arXiv:1610.04490v1 [cs.CV] for this version) Submission history From: Casper Kaae Sønderby [view email] [v1] Fri, 14 Oct 2016 14:58:44 GMT (5502kb,D) Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact. 