 Cornell University Library We gratefully acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation and member institutions arXiv.org > cs > arXiv:1610.04286 All papers Titles Authors Abstracts Full text Help pages (Help | Advanced search) Full-text links: Download: PDF Other formats (license) Current browse context: cs.RO < prev | next > new | recent | 1610 Change to browse by: cs cs.LG References & Citations NASA ADS DBLP - CS Bibliography listing | bibtex Andrei A. Rusu Matej Vecerik Thomas Rothörl Nicolas Heess Razvan Pascanu ... Bookmark (what is this?) Computer Science > Robotics Title: Sim-to-Real Robot Learning from Pixels with Progressive Nets Authors: Andrei A. Rusu, Matej Vecerik, Thomas Rothörl, Nicolas Heess, Razvan Pascanu, Raia Hadsell (Submitted on 13 Oct 2016) Abstract: Applying end-to-end learning to solve complex, interactive, pixel-driven control tasks on a robot is an unsolved problem. Deep Reinforcement Learning algorithms are too slow to achieve performance on a real robot, but their potential has been demonstrated in simulated environments. We propose using progressive networks to bridge the reality gap and transfer learned policies from simulation to the real world. The progressive net approach is a general framework that enables reuse of everything from low-level visual features to high-level policies for transfer to new tasks, enabling a compositional, yet simple, approach to building complex skills. We present an early demonstration of this approach with a number of experiments in the domain of robot manipulation that focus on bridging the reality gap. Unlike other proposed approaches, our real-world experiments demonstrate successful task learning from raw visual input on a fully actuated robot manipulator. Moreover, rather than relying on model-based trajectory optimisation, the task learning is accomplished using only deep reinforcement learning and sparse rewards. Subjects: Robotics (cs.RO); Learning (cs.LG) Cite as: arXiv:1610.04286 [cs.RO]   (or arXiv:1610.04286v1 [cs.RO] for this version) Submission history From: Andrei Rusu [view email] [v1] Thu, 13 Oct 2016 22:42:10 GMT (1603kb,D) Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact. 