 Cornell University Library We gratefully acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation and member institutions arXiv.org > cs > arXiv:1610.00768 All papers Titles Authors Abstracts Full text Help pages (Help | Advanced search) Full-text links: Download: PDF PostScript Other formats (license) Current browse context: cs.LG < prev | next > new | recent | 1610 Change to browse by: cs cs.CR stat stat.ML References & Citations NASA ADS DBLP - CS Bibliography listing | bibtex Ian J. Goodfellow Nicolas Papernot Patrick D. McDaniel Bookmark (what is this?) Computer Science > Learning Title: cleverhans v0.1: an adversarial machine learning library Authors: Ian Goodfellow, Nicolas Papernot, Patrick McDaniel (Submitted on 3 Oct 2016 (v1), last revised 5 Oct 2016 (this version, v2)) Abstract: cleverhans is a software library that provides standardized reference implementations of adversarial example construction techniques and adversarial training. The library may be used to develop more robust machine learning models and to provide standardized benchmarks of models' performance in the adversarial setting. Benchmarks constructed without a standardized implementation of adversarial example construction are not comparable to each other, because a good result may indicate a robust model or it may merely indicate a weak implementation of the adversarial example construction procedure. This technical report is structured as follows. Section 1 provides an overview of adversarial examples in machine learning and of the cleverhans software. Section 2 presents the core functionalities of the library: namely the attacks based on adversarial examples and defenses to improve the robustness of machine learning models to these attacks. Section 3 describes how to report benchmark results using the library. Section 4 describes the versioning system. Comments: Technical report for this https URL Subjects: Learning (cs.LG); Cryptography and Security (cs.CR); Machine Learning (stat.ML) Cite as: arXiv:1610.00768 [cs.LG]   (or arXiv:1610.00768v2 [cs.LG] for this version) Submission history From: Nicolas Papernot [view email] [v1] Mon, 3 Oct 2016 22:04:07 GMT (5kb) [v2] Wed, 5 Oct 2016 13:54:04 GMT (5kb) Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact. 