 Cornell University Library We gratefully acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation and member institutions arXiv.org > cs > arXiv:1612.00380 All papers Titles Authors Abstracts Full text Help pages (Help | Advanced search) Full-text links: Download: PDF Other formats (license) Current browse context: cs.AI < prev | next > new | recent | 1612 Change to browse by: cs cs.CV stat stat.ML References & Citations NASA ADS Bookmark (what is this?) Computer Science > Artificial Intelligence Title: Playing Doom with SLAM-Augmented Deep Reinforcement Learning Authors: Shehroze Bhatti, Alban Desmaison, Ondrej Miksik, Nantas Nardelli, N. Siddharth, Philip H. S. Torr (Submitted on 1 Dec 2016) Abstract: A number of recent approaches to policy learning in 2D game domains have been successful going directly from raw input images to actions. However when employed in complex 3D environments, they typically suffer from challenges related to partial observability, combinatorial exploration spaces, path planning, and a scarcity of rewarding scenarios. Inspired from prior work in human cognition that indicates how humans employ a variety of semantic concepts and abstractions (object categories, localisation, etc.) to reason about the world, we build an agent-model that incorporates such abstractions into its policy-learning framework. We augment the raw image input to a Deep Q-Learning Network (DQN), by adding details of objects and structural elements encountered, along with the agent's localisation. The different components are automatically extracted and composed into a topological representation using on-the-fly object detection and 3D-scene reconstruction.We evaluate the efficacy of our approach in Doom, a 3D first-person combat game that exhibits a number of challenges discussed, and show that our augmented framework consistently learns better, more effective policies. Subjects: Artificial Intelligence (cs.AI); Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (cs.CV); Machine Learning (stat.ML) Cite as: arXiv:1612.00380 [cs.AI]   (or arXiv:1612.00380v1 [cs.AI] for this version) Submission history From: Nantas Nardelli [view email] [v1] Thu, 1 Dec 2016 18:54:51 GMT (2136kb,D) Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact. 