 Cornell University Library We gratefully acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation and member institutions arXiv.org > cs > arXiv:1610.06402 All papers Titles Authors Abstracts Full text Help pages (Help | Advanced search) Full-text links: Download: PDF Other formats (license) Current browse context: cs.AI < prev | next > new | recent | 1610 Change to browse by: cs cs.LG cs.NE References & Citations NASA ADS DBLP - CS Bibliography listing | bibtex Marc Pickett Rami Al-Rfou' Louis Shao Chris Tar Bookmark (what is this?) Computer Science > Artificial Intelligence Title: A Growing Long-term Episodic & Semantic Memory Authors: Marc Pickett, Rami Al-Rfou, Louis Shao, Chris Tar (Submitted on 20 Oct 2016) Abstract: The long-term memory of most connectionist systems lies entirely in the weights of the system. Since the number of weights is typically fixed, this bounds the total amount of knowledge that can be learned and stored. Though this is not normally a problem for a neural network designed for a specific task, such a bound is undesirable for a system that continually learns over an open range of domains. To address this, we describe a lifelong learning system that leverages a fast, though non-differentiable, content-addressable memory which can be exploited to encode both a long history of sequential episodic knowledge and semantic knowledge over many episodes for an unbounded number of domains. This opens the door for investigation into transfer learning, and leveraging prior knowledge that has been learned over a lifetime of experiences to new domains. Comments: Submission to NIPS workshop on Continual Learning. 4 page extended abstract plus 5 more pages of references, figures, and supplementary material Subjects: Artificial Intelligence (cs.AI); Learning (cs.LG); Neural and Evolutionary Computing (cs.NE) Cite as: arXiv:1610.06402 [cs.AI]   (or arXiv:1610.06402v1 [cs.AI] for this version) Submission history From: Marc Pickett [view email] [v1] Thu, 20 Oct 2016 13:29:56 GMT (216kb,D) Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact. 