 Cornell University Library We gratefully acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation and member institutions arXiv.org > stat > arXiv:1611.01843 All papers Titles Authors Abstracts Full text Help pages (Help | Advanced search) Full-text links: Download: PDF Other formats (license) Current browse context: stat.ML < prev | next > new | recent | 1611 Change to browse by: cs cs.AI cs.CV cs.LG cs.NE physics physics.soc-ph stat References & Citations NASA ADS Bookmark (what is this?) Statistics > Machine Learning Title: Learning to Perform Physics Experiments via Deep Reinforcement Learning Authors: Misha Denil, Pulkit Agrawal, Tejas D Kulkarni, Tom Erez, Peter Battaglia, Nando de Freitas (Submitted on 6 Nov 2016 (v1), last revised 14 Nov 2016 (this version, v2)) Abstract: When encountering novel objects, humans are able to infer a wide range of physical properties such as mass, friction and deformability by interacting with them in a goal driven way. This process of active interaction is in the same spirit as a scientist performing experiments to discover hidden facts. Recent advances in artificial intelligence have yielded machines that can achieve superhuman performance in Go, Atari, natural language processing, and complex control problems; however, it is not clear that these systems can rival the scientific intuition of even a young child. In this work we introduce a basic set of tasks that require agents to estimate properties such as mass and cohesion of objects in an interactive simulated environment where they can manipulate the objects and observe the consequences. We found that state of art deep reinforcement learning methods can learn to perform the experiments necessary to discover such hidden properties. By systematically manipulating the problem difficulty and the cost incurred by the agent for performing experiments, we found that agents learn different strategies that balance the cost of gathering information against the cost of making mistakes in different situations. Subjects: Machine Learning (stat.ML); Artificial Intelligence (cs.AI); Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (cs.CV); Learning (cs.LG); Neural and Evolutionary Computing (cs.NE); Physics and Society (physics.soc-ph) Cite as: arXiv:1611.01843 [stat.ML]   (or arXiv:1611.01843v2 [stat.ML] for this version) Submission history From: Misha Denil [view email] [v1] Sun, 6 Nov 2016 20:55:19 GMT (1060kb,D) [v2] Mon, 14 Nov 2016 16:40:58 GMT (1328kb,D) Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact. 