 Cornell University Library We gratefully acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation and member institutions arXiv.org > cs > arXiv:1611.06355 All papers Titles Authors Abstracts Full text Help pages (Help | Advanced search) Full-text links: Download: PDF Other formats Current browse context: cs.CV < prev | next > new | recent | 1611 Change to browse by: cs cs.AI References & Citations NASA ADS DBLP - CS Bibliography listing | bibtex Guim Perarnau Joost van de Weijer Bogdan Raducanu Jose M. Álvarez Bookmark (what is this?) Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Title: Invertible Conditional GANs for image editing Authors: Guim Perarnau, Joost van de Weijer, Bogdan Raducanu, Jose M. Álvarez (Submitted on 19 Nov 2016) Abstract: Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have recently demonstrated to successfully approximate complex data distributions. A relevant extension of this model is conditional GANs (cGANs), where the introduction of external information allows to determine specific representations of the generated images. In this work, we evaluate encoders to inverse the mapping of a cGAN, i.e., mapping a real image into a latent space and a conditional representation. This allows, for example, to reconstruct and modify real images of faces conditioning on arbitrary attributes. Additionally, we evaluate the design of cGANs. The combination of an encoder with a cGAN, which we call Invertible cGAN (IcGAN), enables to re-generate real images with deterministic complex modifications. Comments: Accepted paper at NIPS 2016 Workshop on Adversarial Training Subjects: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (cs.CV); Artificial Intelligence (cs.AI) Cite as: arXiv:1611.06355 [cs.CV]   (or arXiv:1611.06355v1 [cs.CV] for this version) Submission history From: Guim Perarnau [view email] [v1] Sat, 19 Nov 2016 12:35:01 GMT (2392kb,D) Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact. 