 Cornell University Library We gratefully acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation and member institutions arXiv.org > cs > arXiv:1611.03530 All papers Titles Authors Abstracts Full text Help pages (Help | Advanced search) Full-text links: Download: PDF Other formats (license) Current browse context: cs.LG < prev | next > new | recent | 1611 Change to browse by: cs References & Citations NASA ADS DBLP - CS Bibliography listing | bibtex Chiyuan Zhang Samy Bengio Moritz Hardt Benjamin Recht Oriol Vinyals Bookmark (what is this?) Computer Science > Learning Title: Understanding deep learning requires rethinking generalization Authors: Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, Oriol Vinyals (Submitted on 10 Nov 2016) Abstract: Despite their massive size, successful deep artificial neural networks can exhibit a remarkably small difference between training and test performance. Conventional wisdom attributes small generalization error either to properties of the model family, or to the regularization techniques used during training. Through extensive systematic experiments, we show how these traditional approaches fail to explain why large neural networks generalize well in practice. Specifically, our experiments establish that state-of-the-art convolutional networks for image classification trained with stochastic gradient methods easily fit a random labeling of the training data. This phenomenon is qualitatively unaffected by explicit regularization, and occurs even if we replace the true images by completely unstructured random noise. We corroborate these experimental findings with a theoretical construction showing that simple depth two neural networks already have perfect finite sample expressivity as soon as the number of parameters exceeds the number of data points as it usually does in practice. We interpret our experimental findings by comparison with traditional models. Subjects: Learning (cs.LG) Cite as: arXiv:1611.03530 [cs.LG]   (or arXiv:1611.03530v1 [cs.LG] for this version) Submission history From: Chiyuan Zhang [view email] [v1] Thu, 10 Nov 2016 22:02:36 GMT (296kb,D) Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact. 