 Cornell University Library We gratefully acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation and member institutions arXiv.org > cs > arXiv:1610.03017 All papers Titles Authors Abstracts Full text Help pages (Help | Advanced search) Full-text links: Download: PDF Other formats (license) Current browse context: cs.CL < prev | next > new | recent | 1610 Change to browse by: cs cs.LG References & Citations NASA ADS DBLP - CS Bibliography listing | bibtex Jason Lee Kyunghyun Cho Thomas Hofmann Bookmark (what is this?) Computer Science > Computation and Language Title: Fully Character-Level Neural Machine Translation without Explicit Segmentation Authors: Jason Lee, Kyunghyun Cho, Thomas Hofmann (Submitted on 10 Oct 2016 (v1), last revised 1 Nov 2016 (this version, v2)) Abstract: Most existing machine translation systems operate at the level of words, relying on explicit segmentation to extract tokens. We introduce a neural machine translation (NMT) model that maps a source character sequence to a target character sequence without any segmentation. We employ a character-level convolutional network with max-pooling at the encoder to reduce the length of source representation, allowing the model to be trained at a speed comparable to subword-level models while capturing local regularities. Our character-to-character model outperforms a recently proposed baseline with a subword-level encoder on WMT'15 DE-EN and CS-EN, and gives comparable performance on FI-EN and RU-EN. We then demonstrate that it is possible to share a single character-level encoder across multiple languages by training a model on a many-to-one translation task. In this multilingual setting, the character-level encoder significantly outperforms the subword-level encoder on all the language pairs. We observe that on CS-EN, FI-EN and RU-EN, the quality of the multilingual character-level translation even surpasses the models specifically trained on that language pair alone, both in terms of BLEU score and human judgment. Comments: 15 pages, 2 figures Subjects: Computation and Language (cs.CL); Learning (cs.LG) Cite as: arXiv:1610.03017 [cs.CL]   (or arXiv:1610.03017v2 [cs.CL] for this version) Submission history From: Jason Lee [view email] [v1] Mon, 10 Oct 2016 18:19:34 GMT (380kb,D) [v2] Tue, 1 Nov 2016 17:51:32 GMT (415kb,D) Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact. 