 Cornell University Library We gratefully acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation and member institutions arXiv.org > physics > arXiv:1610.02365 All papers Titles Authors Abstracts Full text Help pages (Help | Advanced search) Full-text links: Download: PDF Other formats (license) Current browse context: physics.optics < prev | next > new | recent | 1610 Change to browse by: physics physics.comp-ph References & Citations NASA ADS Bookmark (what is this?) Physics > Optics Title: Deep Learning with Coherent Nanophotonic Circuits Authors: Yichen Shen, Nicholas C. Harris, Scott Skirlo, Mihika Prabhu, Tom Baehr-Jones, Michael Hochberg, Xin Sun, Shijie Zhao, Hugo Larochelle, Dirk Englund, Marin Soljacic (Submitted on 7 Oct 2016) Abstract: Artificial Neural Networks are computational network models inspired by signal processing in the brain. These models have dramatically improved the performance of many learning tasks, including speech and object recognition. However, today's computing hardware is inefficient at implementing neural networks, in large part because much of it was designed for von Neumann computing schemes. Significant effort has been made to develop electronic architectures tuned to implement artificial neural networks that improve upon both computational speed and energy efficiency. Here, we propose a new architecture for a fully-optical neural network that, using unique advantages of optics, promises a computational speed enhancement of at least two orders of magnitude over the state-of-the-art and three orders of magnitude in power efficiency for conventional learning tasks. We experimentally demonstrate essential parts of our architecture using a programmable nanophotonic processor. Comments: 8 pages, 3 figures Subjects: Optics (physics.optics); Computational Physics (physics.comp-ph) Cite as: arXiv:1610.02365 [physics.optics]   (or arXiv:1610.02365v1 [physics.optics] for this version) Submission history From: Yichen Shen [view email] [v1] Fri, 7 Oct 2016 18:30:10 GMT (1108kb,D) Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact. 