 Cornell University Library We gratefully acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation and member institutions arXiv.org > cs > arXiv:1610.09064 All papers Titles Authors Abstracts Full text Help pages (Help | Advanced search) Full-text links: Download: PDF Other formats (license) Current browse context: cs.AI < prev | next > new | recent | 1610 Change to browse by: cs References & Citations NASA ADS DBLP - CS Bibliography listing | bibtex Himabindu Lakkaraju Ece Kamar Rich Caruana Eric Horvitz Bookmark (what is this?) Computer Science > Artificial Intelligence Title: Discovering Blind Spots of Predictive Models: Representations and Policies for Guided Exploration Authors: Himabindu Lakkaraju, Ece Kamar, Rich Caruana, Eric Horvitz (Submitted on 28 Oct 2016) Abstract: Predictive models deployed in the world may assign incorrect labels to instances with high confidence. Such errors or unknown unknowns are rooted in model incompleteness, and typically arise because of the mismatch between training data and the cases seen in the open world. As the models are blind to such errors, input from an oracle is needed to identify these failures. In this paper, we formulate and address the problem of optimizing the discovery of unknown unknowns of any predictive model under a fixed budget, which limits the number of times an oracle can be queried for true labels. We propose a model-agnostic methodology which uses feedback from an oracle to both identify unknown unknowns and to intelligently guide the discovery. We employ a two-phase approach which first organizes the data into multiple partitions based on instance similarity, and then utilizes an explore-exploit strategy for discovering unknown unknowns across these partitions. We demonstrate the efficacy of our framework by varying the underlying causes of unknown unknowns across various applications. To the best of our knowledge, this paper presents the first algorithmic approach to the problem of discovering unknown unknowns of predictive models. Subjects: Artificial Intelligence (cs.AI) Cite as: arXiv:1610.09064 [cs.AI]   (or arXiv:1610.09064v1 [cs.AI] for this version) Submission history From: Himabindu Lakkaraju [view email] [v1] Fri, 28 Oct 2016 02:55:14 GMT (6393kb,D) Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact. 