 Cornell University Library We gratefully acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation and member institutions arXiv.org > cs > arXiv:1611.02049 All papers Titles Authors Abstracts Full text Help pages (Help | Advanced search) Full-text links: Download: PDF Other formats (license) Current browse context: cs.RO < prev | next > new | recent | 1611 Change to browse by: cs cs.NE References & Citations NASA ADS DBLP - CS Bibliography listing | bibtex Michal Nowicki Jan Wietrzykowski Bookmark (what is this?) Computer Science > Robotics Title: Low-effort place recognition with WiFi fingerprints using deep learning Authors: Michał Nowicki, Jan Wietrzykowski (Submitted on 7 Nov 2016) Abstract: Using WiFi signals for indoor localization is the main localization modality of the existing personal indoor localization systems operating on mobile devices. WiFi fingerprinting is also used for mobile robots, as WiFi signals are usually available indoors and can provide rough initial position estimate or can be used together with other positioning systems. Currently, the best solutions rely on filtering, manual data analysis, and time-consuming parameter tuning to achieve reliable and accurate localization. In this work, we propose to use deep neural networks to significantly lower the work-force burden of the localization system design, while still achieving satisfactory results. Assuming the state-of-the-art hierarchical approach, we employ the DNN system for building/floor classification. We show that stacked autoencoders allow to efficiently reduce the feature space in order to achieve robust and precise classification. The proposed architecture is verified on the publicly available UJIIndoorLoc dataset and the results are compared with other solutions. Subjects: Robotics (cs.RO); Neural and Evolutionary Computing (cs.NE) Cite as: arXiv:1611.02049 [cs.RO]   (or arXiv:1611.02049v1 [cs.RO] for this version) Submission history From: Michal Nowicki [view email] [v1] Mon, 7 Nov 2016 13:47:25 GMT (239kb,D) Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact. 