 Cornell University Library We gratefully acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation and member institutions arXiv.org > cs > arXiv:1610.01983 All papers Titles Authors Abstracts Full text Help pages (Help | Advanced search) Full-text links: Download: PDF Other formats (license) Current browse context: cs.CV < prev | next > new | recent | 1610 Change to browse by: cs cs.RO References & Citations NASA ADS DBLP - CS Bibliography listing | bibtex Matthew Johnson-Roberson Charles Barto Rounak Mehta Sharath Nittur Sridhar Ram Vasudevan Bookmark (what is this?) Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Title: Driving in the Matrix: Can Virtual Worlds Replace Human-Generated Annotations for Real World Tasks? Authors: Matthew Johnson-Roberson, Charles Barto, Rounak Mehta, Sharath Nittur Sridhar, Ram Vasudevan (Submitted on 6 Oct 2016) Abstract: Deep learning has rapidly transformed the state of the art algorithms used to address a variety of problems in computer vision and robotics. These breakthroughs have however relied upon massive amounts of human annotated training data. This time-consuming process has begun impeding the progress of these deep learning efforts. This paper describes a method to incorporate photo-realistic computer images from a simulation engine to rapidly generate annotated data that can be used for training of machine learning algorithms. We demonstrate that a state of the art architecture, which is trained only using these synthetic annotations, performs better than the identical architecture trained on human annotated real-world data, when tested on the KITTI data set for vehicle detection. By training machine learning algorithms on a rich virtual world, this paper illustrates that real objects in real scenes can be learned and classified using synthetic data. This approach offers the possibility of accelerating deep learning's application to sensor based classification problems like those that appear in self-driving cars. Comments: 8 pages Subjects: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (cs.CV); Robotics (cs.RO) Cite as: arXiv:1610.01983 [cs.CV]   (or arXiv:1610.01983v1 [cs.CV] for this version) Submission history From: Matthew Johnson-Roberson [view email] [v1] Thu, 6 Oct 2016 18:26:43 GMT (8066kb,D) Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact. 