 Cornell University Library We gratefully acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation and member institutions arXiv.org > cs > arXiv:1611.10012 All papers Titles Authors Abstracts Full text Help pages (Help | Advanced search) Full-text links: Download: PDF Other formats (license) Current browse context: cs.CV < prev | next > new | recent | 1611 Change to browse by: cs References & Citations NASA ADS DBLP - CS Bibliography listing | bibtex Jonathan Huang Vivek Rathod Chen Sun Menglong Zhu Anoop Korattikara ... Bookmark (what is this?) Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Title: Speed/accuracy trade-offs for modern convolutional object detectors Authors: Jonathan Huang, Vivek Rathod, Chen Sun, Menglong Zhu, Anoop Korattikara, Alireza Fathi, Ian Fischer, Zbigniew Wojna, Yang Song, Sergio Guadarrama, Kevin Murphy (Submitted on 30 Nov 2016) Abstract: In this paper, we study the trade-off between accuracy and speed when building an object detection system based on convolutional neural networks. We consider three main families of detectors --- Faster R-CNN, R-FCN and SSD --- which we view as "meta-architectures". Each of these can be combined with different kinds of feature extractors, such as VGG, Inception or ResNet. In addition, we can vary other parameters, such as the image resolution, and the number of box proposals. We develop a unified framework (in Tensorflow) that enables us to perform a fair comparison between all of these variants. We analyze the performance of many different previously published model combinations, as well as some novel ones, and thus identify a set of models which achieve different points on the speed-accuracy tradeoff curve, ranging from fast models, suitable for use on a mobile phone, to a much slower model that achieves a new state of the art on the COCO detection challenge. Comments: A version of this paper is currently under submission to CVPR 2017 Subjects: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (cs.CV) Cite as: arXiv:1611.10012 [cs.CV]   (or arXiv:1611.10012v1 [cs.CV] for this version) Submission history From: Jonathan Huang [view email] [v1] Wed, 30 Nov 2016 06:06:15 GMT (6896kb,D) Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?) Link back to: arXiv, form interface, contact. 