Currently it performs the functions of Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC) and Lane Keeping Assist System (LKAS) for Hondas and Acuras. It's about on par with Tesla Autopilot at launch, and better than all other manufacturers. The openpilot codebase has been written to be concise and enable rapid prototyping. We look forward to your contributions - improving real vehicle automation has never been easier. Right now openpilot supports the neo research platform for vehicle control. We'd like to support Open Source Car Control as well. To install it on the NEO: To understand how the services interact, see It should be relatively easy to add support for the Honda CR-V Touring. The brake message is the same. Steering has a slightly different message with a different message id. Sniff CAN while using LKAS to find it. The Honda Accord uses different signalling for the steering and probably requires new hardware. Adding other manufacturers besides Honda/Acura is doable but will be more of an undertaking. By default openpilot creates an account and includes a client for chffr, our dashcam app. We use your data to train better models and improve openpilot for everyone. It's open source software, so you are free to disable it if you wish. It logs the road facing camera, CAN, GPS, IMU, magnetometer, thermal sensors, crashes, and operating system logs. It does not log the user facing camera or the microphone. By using it, you agree to our privacy policy. You understand that use of this software or its related services will generate certain types of user data, which may be logged and stored at the sole discretion of comma.ai. By accepting this agreement, you grant an irrevocable, perpetual, worldwide right to comma.ai for the use of this data. We welcome both pull requests and issues on github. See the TODO file for a list of good places to start. Want to get paid to work on openpilot? comma.ai is hiring openpilot is released under the MIT license. THIS IS ALPHA QUALITY SOFTWARE FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ONLY. THIS IS NOT A PRODUCT. YOU ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR COMPLYING WITH LOCAL LAWS AND REGULATIONS. NO WARRANTY EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED.