 Amazon Try Prime Books All Departments Alexa Skills Amazon Video Amazon Warehouse Deals Appliances Apps & Games Arts, Crafts & Sewing Automotive Parts & Accessories Baby Beauty & Personal Care Books CDs & Vinyl Cell Phones & Accessories Clothing, Shoes & Jewelry    Women    Men    Girls    Boys    Baby Collectibles & Fine Art Computers Courses Credit and Payment Cards Digital Music Electronics Gift Cards Grocery & Gourmet Food Handmade Health, Household & Baby Care Home & Business Services Home & Kitchen Industrial & Scientific Kindle Store Luggage & Travel Gear Luxury Beauty Magazine Subscriptions Movies & TV Musical Instruments Office Products Patio, Lawn & Garden Pet Supplies Prime Pantry Software Sports & Outdoors Tools & Home Improvement Toys & Games Vehicles Video Games Wine Go Departments Hello. Sign inAccount & ListsSign inAccount & ListsOrdersTry PrimeCart Your Amazon.comToday's DealsGift Cards & RegistrySellHelp Books Advanced Search New Releases Best Sellers The New York Times® Best Sellers Children's Books Textbooks Textbook Rentals Sell Us Your Books Best Books of the Month Kindle eBooks Books › Computers & Technology › Computer Science Enter your mobile number or email address below and we'll send you a link to download the free Kindle App. Then you can start reading Kindle books on your smartphone, tablet, or computer - no Kindle device required. Apple Android Windows Phone Android To get the free app, enter your mobile phone number. or Download to your computer Mac Windows 8, 8 RT and Modern UI Windows 8 desktop, Windows 7, XP & Vista Kindle Cloud Reader Read instantly in your browser Share Facebook Twitter Pinterest Buy New $68.89 Qty:1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 Qty:1 List Price: $80.00 Save: $11.11 (14%) FREE Shipping. Temporarily out of stock. Order now and we'll deliver when available. Order now and we'll deliver when available. We'll e-mail you with an estimated delivery date as soon as we have more information. Your account will only be charged when we ship the item. Details Ships from and sold by Amazon.com. Gift-wrap available. Add to Cart Turn on 1-Click ordering for this browser Have one to sell? Sell on Amazon Flip to back Flip to front Listen Playing... Paused   You're listening to a sample of the Audible audio edition. Learn more See this image Deep Learning (Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning series) Hardcover – November 18, 2016 by Ian Goodfellow (Author) › Visit Amazon's Ian Goodfellow Page Find all the books, read about the author, and more. See search results for this author Are you an author? Learn about Author Central Ian Goodfellow (Author), Yoshua Bengio (Author) › Visit Amazon's Yoshua Bengio Page Find all the books, read about the author, and more. See search results for this author Are you an author? Learn about Author Central Yoshua Bengio (Author), Aaron Courville (Author) › Visit Amazon's Aaron Courville Page Find all the books, read about the author, and more. See search results for this author Are you an author? Learn about Author Central Aaron Courville (Author) & 0 more 4.9 out of 5 stars 8 customer reviews #1 Best Sellerin Artificial Intelligence & Semantics See all formats and editions Hide other formats and editions Price New from Used from Hardcover "Please retry" $68.89 $68.89 $247.16 Hardcover $68.89 2 Used from $247.16 4 New from $68.89 "Written by three experts in the field, Deep Learning is the only comprehensive book on the subject." -- Elon Musk, cochair of OpenAI; cofounder and CEO of Tesla and SpaceX Deep learning is a form of machine learning that enables computers to learn from experience and understand the world in terms of a hierarchy of concepts. Because the computer gathers knowledge from experience, there is no need for a human computer operator to formally specify all the knowledge that the computer needs. The hierarchy of concepts allows the computer to learn complicated concepts by building them out of simpler ones; a graph of these hierarchies would be many layers deep. This book introduces a broad range of topics in deep learning. The text offers mathematical and conceptual background, covering relevant concepts in linear algebra, probability theory and information theory, numerical computation, and machine learning. It describes deep learning techniques used by practitioners in industry, including deep feedforward networks, regularization, optimization algorithms, convolutional networks, sequence modeling, and practical methodology; and it surveys such applications as natural language processing, speech recognition, computer vision, online recommendation systems, bioinformatics, and videogames. Finally, the book offers research perspectives, covering such theoretical topics as linear factor models, autoencoders, representation learning, structured probabilistic models, Monte Carlo methods, the partition function, approximate inference, and deep generative models. Deep Learning can be used by undergraduate or graduate students planning careers in either industry or research, and by software engineers who want to begin using deep learning in their products or platforms. A website offers supplementary material for both readers and instructors. Read more Read less Best Books of 2016 Looking for something great to read? Browse our editors' picks for the best books of the year in fiction, nonfiction, mysteries, children's books, and much more. Add to Cart Deep Learning (Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning series) $68.89 FREE Shipping. Temporarily out of stock. Order now and we'll deliver when available. We'll e-mail you with an estimated delivery date as soon as we have more information. Your account will only be charged when we ship the item. Ships from and sold by Amazon.com. Gift-wrap available. click to open popover Frequently Bought Together + Total price: $109.38 Add both to Cart Add both to List One of these items ships sooner than the other. Show details Buy the selected items together This item:Deep Learning (Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning series) by Ian Goodfellow Hardcover $68.89 Temporarily out of stock. Ships from and sold by Amazon.com. FREE Shipping. Details Python Machine Learning by Sebastian Raschka Paperback $40.49 In Stock. Ships from and sold by Amazon.com. FREE Shipping. Details What Other Items Do Customers Buy After Viewing This Item? Python Machine Learning Paperback Sebastian Raschka 4.3 out of 5 stars 81 $40.49 Prime Neural Network Design (2nd Edition) Paperback Martin T Hagan 4.7 out of 5 stars 26 $28.50 Prime Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science and Statistics) Hardcover Christopher Bishop 4.1 out of 5 stars 127 $77.97 Prime Learning From Data Hardcover Yaser S. Abu-Mostafa 4.6 out of 5 stars 119 Editorial Reviews Review Written by three experts in the field, Deep Learning is the only comprehensive book on the subject. It provides much-needed broad perspective and mathematical preliminaries for software engineers and students entering the field, and serves as a reference for authorities. (Elon Musk, cochair of OpenAI; cofounder and CEO of Tesla and SpaceX) This is the definitive textbook on deep learning. Written by major contributors to the field, it is clear, comprehensive, and authoritative. If you want to know where deep learning came from, what it is good for, and where it is going, read this book. (Geoffrey Hinton FRS, Emeritus Professor, University of Toronto; Distinguished Research Scientist, Google) Deep learning has taken the world of technology by storm since the beginning of the decade. There was a need for a textbook for students, practitioners, and instructors that includes basic concepts, practical aspects, and advanced research topics. This is the first comprehensive textbook on the subject, written by some of the most innovative and prolific researchers in the field. This will be a reference for years to come. (Yann LeCun, Director of AI Research, Facebook; Silver Professor of Computer Science, Data Science, and Neuroscience, New York University) Read more About the Author Ian Goodfellow is Research Scientist at OpenAI. Yoshua Bengio is Professor of Computer Science at the Université de Montréal. Aaron Courville is Assistant Professor of Computer Science at the Université de Montréal. Read more NO_CONTENT_IN_FEATURE Tell the Publisher! I'd like to read this book on Kindle Don't have a Kindle? Get your Kindle here, or download a FREE Kindle Reading App. New York Times best sellers Browse the New York Times best sellers in popular categories like Fiction, Nonfiction, Picture Books and more. See more Product Details Series: Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning series Hardcover: 800 pages Publisher: The MIT Press (November 18, 2016) Language: English ISBN-10: 0262035618 ISBN-13: 978-0262035613 Product Dimensions: 7 x 1 x 9 inches Shipping Weight: 2.9 pounds (View shipping rates and policies) Average Customer Review: 4.9 out of 5 stars  See all reviews (8 customer reviews) Amazon Best Sellers Rank: #1,578 in Books (See Top 100 in Books) #1 in Books > Computers & Technology > Computer Science > AI & Machine Learning > Intelligence & Semantics #3 in Books > Textbooks > Computer Science #25 in Books > Education & Teaching > Schools & Teaching  Would you like to update product info or give feedback on images? Customer Reviews 4.9 out of 5 stars 8 4.9 out of 5 stars 5 star 88% 4 star 12% 3 star 0% 2 star 0% 1 star 0% See all verified purchase reviews Share your thoughts with other customers Write a customer review Top Customer Reviews 5.0 out of 5 starsA constant theme here is that 'this works better than that' for practical reasons not for underlying theoretical ... By S. Matthews on November 18, 2016 Format: Hardcover This is, to invoke a technical reviewer cliché, a 'valuable' book. Read it and you will have a detailed and sophisticated practical understanding of the state of the art in neural networks technology. Interestingly, I also suspect it will remain current for a long time, because reading it I came to more and more of an impression that neural network technology (at least in the current iteration) is plateauing. Why? Because this book also makes very clear - is completely honest - that neural networks are a 'folk' technology (though they do not use those words): Neural networks work (in fact they work unbelievably well - at least, as Geoffrey Hinton himself has remarked, given unbelievably powerful computers), but the underlying theory is very limited and there is no reason to think that it will become less limited, and the lack of a theory means that there is no convincing 'gradient', to use an appropriate metaphor, for future development. A constant theme here is that 'this works better than that' for practical reasons not for underlying theoretical reasons. Neural networks are engineering, they are not applied mathematics, and this is very much, and very effectively, an engineer's book. 7 Comments 55 people found this helpful. Was this review helpful to you? Yes No Sending feedback... Thank you for your feedback. Sorry, we failed to record your vote. Please try again Report abuse 5.0 out of 5 starsBroad, Mathematical Survey By MsCurious on November 24, 2016 Format: Hardcover This book is a valuable addition to my machine learning library. It's mostly easy to read given enough statistical maturity, say at the level of All of Statistics: A Concise Course in Statistical Inference (Springer Texts in Statistics). Definitely easier than The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction, Second Edition (Springer Series in Statistics) I like the fact that they use clear logical arguments and reference papers to justify certain choices like the RELU unit. I remember reading the classical approximation theorems by Hornik and getting an impression that the unit has to be bounded for universal approximation, which RELU is certainly not, but apparently it has good approximation properties too. I am also glad that they discuss issues of regularization and not just blindly assume that deeper is better as some literature and hype seems to suggest. About 1/3 of the book is background in relevant machine learning basics and optimization, mostly part I. Convex optimization is very much an active research field now, and they describe some new interesting algorithms. The rest of the book surveys various deep learning architectures. Based on the organization of the material, I would guess they consider convolutional and recurrent networks to be the main architectures that should be used in certain specific application. I'm surprised that they consider Boltzmann machines to be research rather then current practice, but they are the experts.Read more › 1 Comment 10 people found this helpful. Was this review helpful to you? Yes No Sending feedback... Thank you for your feedback. Sorry, we failed to record your vote. Please try again Report abuse 5.0 out of 5 starsAwesome Deep Learning Textbook By Justin Chen on November 25, 2016 Format: Hardcover Verified Purchase I was pretty excited when I heard earlier this year that Yoshua Bengio, Ian Goodfellow, and Aaron Courville were writing this textbook. Just got my copy in the mail today. Read a few chapters and skimmed through some of the book. This is a very comprehensive, well-written, and easy-to-understand textbook on the theoretical foundations, current research, and applications of deep learning. I've read a lot of research papers (DeepMind, Google Brain, Facebook, NYU, Stanford, etc.), blogs (Nervana Systems, Indico, Colah, Otoro's Blog, etc.), lecture notes (Stanford cs231n, cs224d, cs229), and tutorials (Quoc Le's tutorial, TensorFlow, etc.), and have watched a lot of videos (Hugo Larochelle's tutorials, Stanford cs229, TedTalks, lectures by Yann LeCun <3, etc.) to teach myself this topic. Despite the abundance of great resources floating around on the internet, there hasn't been any single thoroughly compiled resource like this. I'm wicked excited to finally own a copy. Many thanks. Shouts from Boston University! :D Comment 10 people found this helpful. Was this review helpful to you? Yes No Sending feedback... Thank you for your feedback. Sorry, we failed to record your vote. Please try again Report abuse 5.0 out of 5 starsSolid / practical guide for all. By matthew l kelcey on December 1, 2016 Format: Hardcover Verified Purchase Exceptional coverage of a complex field, including loads of introductory material for those new to the area. I really enjoy the strong practical focus. The only con to a book like this is the field is moving fast and it's inevitable that any text can't cover everything. Comment Was this review helpful to you? Yes No Sending feedback... Thank you for your feedback. Sorry, we failed to record your vote. Please try again Report abuse See all verified purchase reviews (newest first) Write a customer review Most Recent Customer Reviews 4.0 out of 5 starsFree version of the book available. On the accompanying web-site, there is an easy to print "HTML" version of the book. They don't have PDF version, because of the contract with MIT that forbids it, but what... Read more Published 4 days ago by Nikita 5.0 out of 5 starsFive Stars Nice blend of foundation and cutting edge. Published 8 days ago by Amazon Customer 5.0 out of 5 starsFive Stars good quality. Published 10 days ago by cxxchen 5.0 out of 5 starsFour Stars The book looks good, but, when will the book be available for kindle? Published 16 days ago by Flávio Search Customer Reviews Search Customers Who Viewed This Item Also Viewed Page 1 of 1 Start overPage 1 of 1 This shopping feature will continue to load items. In order to navigate out of this carousel please use your heading shortcut key to navigate to the next or previous heading. Back Python Machine Learning Sebastian Raschka 4.3 out of 5 stars 81 #1 Best Seller in Data Modeling & Design Paperback $40.49 Prime Machine Learning Refined: Foundations, Algorithms, and Applications Jeremy Watt Hardcover $80.74 Prime Deep Learning: A Practitioner's Approach Josh Patterson Paperback $28.56 Prime Neural Network Design (2nd Edition) Martin T Hagan 4.7 out of 5 stars 26 Paperback $28.50 Prime Machine Learning: The New AI (The MIT Press Essential Knowledge series) Ethem Alpaydin 4.0 out of 5 stars 3 Paperback $10.63 Prime Fundamentals of Deep Learning: Designing Next-Generation Machine Intelligence Algorithms Nikhil Buduma Paperback $32.99 Prime Next There's a problem loading this menu right now. Learn more about Amazon Prime. Get fast, free shipping with Amazon Prime Prime members enjoy FREE Two-Day Shipping and exclusive access to music, movies, TV shows, original audio series, and Kindle books. > Get started Back to top Get to Know Us Careers About Amazon Investor Relations Amazon Devices Make Money with Us Sell on Amazon Sell Your Services on Amazon Sell on Amazon Business Sell Your Apps on Amazon Become an Affiliate Advertise Your Products Self-Publish with Us Become an Amazon Vendor ›See all Amazon Payment Products Amazon.com Rewards Visa Card Amazon.com Store Card Amazon.com Corporate Credit Line Shop with Points Credit Card Marketplace Reload Your Balance Amazon Currency Converter Let Us Help You Your Account Your Orders Shipping Rates & Policies Amazon Prime Returns & Replacements Manage Your Content and Devices Amazon Assistant Help Australia Brazil Canada China France Germany India Italy Japan Mexico Netherlands Spain United Kingdom 6pm Score deals on fashion brands AbeBooks Rare Books & Textbooks ACX Audiobook Publishing Made Easy Alexa Actionable Analytics for the Web Amazon Business Everything For Your Business AmazonFresh Groceries & More Right To Your Door AmazonGlobal Ship Orders Internationally   Home Services Handpicked Pros Happiness Guarantee Amazon Inspire Free Digital Educational Resources Amazon Rapids Fun stories for kids on the go Amazon Video Direct Video Distribution Made Easy Amazon Web Services Scalable Cloud Computing Services Audible Download Audio Books BeautyBar.com Prestige Beauty Delivered   Book Depository Books With Free Delivery Worldwide Casa.com Kitchen, Storage & Everything Home ComiXology Thousands of Digital Comics CreateSpace Indie Print Publishing Made Easy Diapers.com Everything But The Baby DPReview Digital Photography East Dane Designer Men's Fashion   Fabric Sewing, Quilting & Knitting Goodreads Book reviews & recommendations IMDb Movies, TV & Celebrities Junglee.com Shop Online in India Kindle Direct Publishing Indie Digital Publishing Made Easy Prime Now FREE 2-Hour Delivery on Everyday Items Prime Photos Unlimited Photo Storage Free With Prime   Shopbop Designer Fashion Brands Soap.com Health, Beauty & Home Essentials TenMarks.com Math Activities for Kids & Schools Wag.com Everything For Your Pet Warehouse Deals Open-Box Discounts Whispercast Discover & Distribute Digital Content Woot! Deals and Shenanigans       Yoyo.com A Happy Place To Shop For Toys Zappos Shoes & Clothing       Conditions of Use Privacy Notice Interest-Based Ads © 1996-2016, Amazon.com, Inc. or its affiliates 