 Menu Search Follow Us Facebook Instagram Twitter Youtube Flipboard LinkedIn Google+ RSS More Youtube Flipboard LinkedIn Google+ RSS Got a tip? Let us know. News Channels Startups Mobile Gadgets Enterprise Social Europe Asia Crunch Network Unicorn Leaderboard Gift Guides All Topics All Galleries All Timelines Video Shows Apps News Crunch Report Disrupt SF 2016 Gadgets Reviews Interviews TC Features All Shows All Videos Events TechCrunch Events Disrupt Startup Battlefield Crunchies Meetups International City Events Hackathon Include NFL’s 1ST and Future TechCrunch Store News About Mobile World Congress CES All Events Crunchbase Trending Tesla Google Facebook News Startups Mobile Gadgets Enterprise Social Europe Message Us Search TechCrunch Search TechCrunch Search Search × Hi! You are about to activate our Facebook Messenger news bot. Once subscribed, the bot will send you a digest of trending stories once a day. You can also customize the types of stories it sends you. Click on the button below to subscribe and wait for a new Facebook message from the TC Messenger news bot. Thanks, TC Team Disrupt LondonLast 24 Hours To Save Before Prices Jump On Disrupt London Tickets Save £250 On Tickets Artificial Intelligence The Emotion Journal performs real-time sentiment analysis on your most personal stories Bots that work everywhere Apple reveals autonomous vehicle ambitions in letter to US regulators Browse more... AI Logojoy turns design into an AI-powered, iterative process Amazon launches Amazon AI to bring its machine learning smarts to developers AI-powered virtual assistant, Mezi, pivots to focus on travel Browse more... huawei Huawei goes over-the-top with a Porsche Design version of its Mate 9 Huawei’s Mate 9 has a 5.9-inch display, a giant battery and is coming to the States, eventually Huawei’s Fit is a no-frills activity tracker Browse more... Huawei puts $1M into a new AI research partnership with UC Berkeley Posted Oct 11, 2016 by Ingrid Lunden (@ingridlunden) 0 SHARES Next Story Samsung kills the Galaxy Note 7 for good Artificial intelligence continues to have its moment in the spotlight, with a surge of interest in startups and efforts from huge tech companies to push the boundaries of how we might best use machine learning, computer vision and other areas of AI in the future. The latest development on that front comes from China’s Huawei, which today announced that it would form a research partnership with UC Berkeley focused on AI, and fund it to the initial tune of $1 million. The alliance, between Huawei’s Noah’s Ark Laboratory and Berkeley Artificial Intelligence Research (BAIR), is being billed as a “strategic partnership into basic research”, and it will cover areas like deep learning, reinforcement learning, machine learning, natural language processing and computer vision. “The two parties believe that this strategic partnership will fuel the advancement of AI technology and create completely new experiences for people, thus contributing greatly to society at large,” Huawei notes. Some of these areas of AI you will have heard a lot about already. Machine learning has become a central part of a lot of basic large-scale computing projects, from bots to search engines and more. Computer vision is being applied in areas like facial recognition tech, AR, VR and self-driving applications. NLP is what makes services like Amazon’s Alexa, Apple’s Siri, and Microsoft’s Cortana work. Others are still in an early phase: reinforcement learning, for example, sits on top of AI systems to help them learn to make better decisions. To date it is still only being worked on by a handful of companies, so that is one key area where Huawei could potentially get a jump by partnering with a university directly. AI has become a central part of how many tech companies are thinking about their next generation of devices and services. But one of the challenges for companies like Huawei — one of the world’s biggest phone and telecoms equipment makers, and highly ambitious in the wider world of consumer electronics — is that it has become a race for talent. Competitors like Google, Apple, Amazon and Facebook have been working hard to not only develop a lot of the cutting-edge work in-house, but they have been working closely with universities, as well as snapping up companies and talent coming straight out of universities, to advance their in-house work. Google back in 2014, off the back of its acquisition of DeepMind, formed a partnership with Oxford University, contributing funding to AI research there, and acqui-hired two of the startups that had been incubated at Oxford as part of that effort. Apple has also been known to tap and buy startups that are fresh out of the research labs, such as its acquisition of Faceshift last year. And Amazon is running university competitions to lure out interesting ideas in AI. More recently, several large tech companies (pointedly not including Huawei) formed a non-profit group to explore the opportunities and pitfalls of AI. You could say that now Huawei is rising to challenge by working with researchers at Berkeley on their own AI projects. Berkeley has a history of extensive work and research in AI, and while the BAIR lab is a relatively new face for that effort, it already works with 11 other big companies as “industrial partners”, which means Huawei is not exactly getting free reign as a corporate partner. (The others are Facebook, Microsoft, Samsung, Sony, Adobe, Amazon, Yahoo Japan, Nvidia, Intel, Siemens — itself investing $1 billion into AI research — and Citris.) The lab also has 2 dozen faculty and 100 grad students. Huawei’s expressively named Noah’s Ark lab, meanwhile, has been around for about four years and is part of the company’s effort to put some $8.1 billion annually into R&D. Huawei is very focused on advancing on this front, and has over 75,000 employees working solely on R&D — perhaps one reason why MIT Technology Review named it the 10th “smartest company” in a recent survey. Maybe fittingly for an organization called Noah’s Ark, expanding research to Berkeley appears to be part of a wider remit to plant seeds for Huawei research globally: another recent outpost was created in Paris. It’s just early days, and so it remains to be seen whether Huawei can attract and bottle some of the more interesting AI tech that it will come across in this newest partnership with Berkeley. But at the very least, forging the alliance will put it in a position to try. 0 SHARES Advertisement Advertisement Crunchbase Huawei Technologies Founded 1987 Overview Huawei Technologies is a telecom solutions company that offers infrastructure application software and devices with wireline, wireless, and IP technologies. The company’s products and solutions have been deployed in over 100 countries and have served 45 of the world's top 50 telecom operators as well as one third of the world's population. Huawei Technologies has 3 divisions in the United States: … Location Plano, TX Categories Security, Web Hosting, Wireless, Mobile Website http://huawei.com Full profile for Huawei Technologies U.C. Berkeley Founded 1868 Overview The University of California, Berkeley is a public research university located in Berkeley, California. It is the most selective – and highest ranked in U.S. News and ARWU – public university in the world for undergraduate education. Aside from its academic prestige, UC Berkeley is also well known for producing a high number of entrepreneurs. Full profile for U.C. Berkeley Newsletter Subscriptions The Daily Crunch Get the top tech stories of the day delivered to your inbox TC Weekly Roundup Get a weekly recap of the biggest tech stories Crunchbase Daily The latest startup funding announcements Enter Address Subscribe SEE ALL NEWSLETTERS » Latest Crunch Report GoPro Cuts 15% of Workforce | Crunch Report Watch More Episodes AI huawei Artificial Intelligence Popular Posts Featured Stories The Emotion Journal wins the Disrupt London 2016 Hackathon Grand Prize 3 hours ago | Romain Dillet My Bricks Online puts your smartphone in Lego to make playtime fun again 3 hours ago | Jon Russell Disrupt Hackathon app Notim.press/ed algorithmically detects fake news 3 hours ago | Josh Constine Amplify lets you play synchronized songs across every phone in the room 4 hours ago | Matthew Lynley Latest From Asia Emotibot wants to help chatbots know how you really feel Dec 2, 2016 | Darrell Etherington Didi’s CTO explains why China’s ride-sharing giant has a data advantage Dec 2, 2016 | Darrell Etherington WeChat, China’s top messaging app, no longer tells users when it censors their messages Dec 2, 2016 | Jon Russell Uber rival Grab’s newest investor will help its drivers own their vehicle Dec 1, 2016 | Jon Russell Comment moderation powered by Up Next Samsung kills the Galaxy Note 7 for good Posted Oct 11, 2016 CrunchBoard Job Listings ENGINEER - RESEARCH ENGINEER - SPACE & ENERGY SYSTEMS at Southwest Research Institute (San Antonio, TX, United States) RESEARCH ANALYST - SR. RESEARCH ANALYST - INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS at Southwest Research Institute (San Antonio, TX, United States) ENGINEER - RESEARCH ENGINEER - SPACE AND ENERGY SYSTEMS at Southwest Research Institute (San Antonio, TX, United States) Director of Sales at The Juilliard School (New York, NY, United States) Software Engineer, DevOps at GenePeeks, Inc. (Cambridge, MA, United States) More from CrunchBoard Advertisement TechCrunch News Video Events Crunchbase TechCrunch Store About Staff Contact Us Advertise With Us Event & Editorial Calendar Send Us A Tip International China Europe Japan Follow TechCrunch Facebook Twitter Google+ LinkedIn Youtube Pinterest Tumblr Instagram StumbleUpon Feed TechCrunch Apps iOS Android Windows 8 Subscribe to The Daily Crunch Latest headlines delivered to you daily Subscribe to <span class="no-mobile">Subscribe to </span>The Daily Crunch Enter Email Address Subscribe © 2013-2016 AOL Inc. All rights reserved. Aol Tech Privacy Policy About Our Ads Anti Harassment Policy Terms of Service Powered by WordPress.com VIP Fonts by News Startups Mobile Gadgets Enterprise Social Europe Asia Crunch Network Unicorn Leaderboard Gift Guides All Galleries All Timelines Videos Apps News Crunch Report Disrupt SF 2016 All Shows All Videos Events Disrupt Startup Battlefield Crunchies Meetups International City Events Hackathon Include NFL’s 1ST and Future TechCrunch Store All Events Crunchbase Message Us Most Popular Google launches App Maker Nov 30, 2016 by Frederic Lardinois Facebook’s advice to students interested in artificial intelligence Dec 1, 2016 by John Mannes The Emotion Journal wins the Disrupt London 2016 Hackathon Grand Prize 3 hours ago by Romain Dillet The Emotion Journal performs real-time sentiment analysis on your most personal stories 3 hours ago by Kate Conger Hands On With DirecTV Now, AT&T’s new streaming service for cord cutters yesterday by Sarah Perez What interns and new grads really get paid at top tech companies yesterday by Lora Kolodny How Google Analytics ruined marketing Aug 7, 2016 by Samuel Scott Amplify lets you play synchronized songs across every phone in the room 4 hours ago by Matthew Lynley 